In the previous video, you saw how you
can use mini-batch gradient descent
to start making progress and start taking
gradient descent steps, even when you're
just partway through processing your
training set even for the first time.
In this video, you learn more details of
how to implement gradient descent and
gain a better understanding of
what it's doing and why it works.
With batch gradient descent on every
iteration you go through the entire
training set and you'd expect the cost
to go down on every single iteration.
So if we've had the cost function j as
a function of different iterations it
should decrease on every single iteration.
And if it ever goes up even on
iteration then something is wrong.
Maybe you're running ways to big.
On mini batch gradient descent though, if
you plot progress on your cost function,
then it may not decrease
on every iteration.
In particular, on every iteration you're
processing some X, Y and so
if you plot the cost function J,
which is computer using just X, Y.
Then it's as if on every iteration you're
training on a different training set or
really training on a different mini batch.
So you plot the cross function J,
you're more likely to see
something that looks like this.
It should trend downwards, but it's
also going to be a little bit noisier.
So if you plot J, as you're
training mini batch in descent it may
be over multiple epochs,
you might expect to see a curve like this.
So it's okay if it doesn't
go down on every derivation.
But it should trend downwards, and
the reason it'll be a little
bit noisy is that, maybe X,
Y is just the rows of easy mini batch
so your cost might be a bit lower,
but then maybe just by chance, X,
Y is just a harder mini batch.
Maybe you needed some
mislabeled examples in it,
in which case the cost will
be a bit higher and so on.
So that's why you get
these oscillations as you
plot the cost when you're running
mini batch gradient descent.
Now one of the parameters you need to
choose is the size of your mini batch.
So m was the training set size on
one extreme, if the mini-batch size,
= m, then you just end up
with batch gradient descent.
Al lright, so in this extreme you
would just have one mini-batch X,
Y, and this mini-batch is equal
to your entire training set.
So setting a mini-batch size m just
gives you batch gradient descent.
The other extreme would be if
your mini-batch size, Were = 1.
This gives you an algorithm called
stochastic gradient descent.
And here every example
is its own mini-batch.
So what you do in this case is you look
at the first mini-batch, so X, Y,
but when your mini-batch size is one,
this just has your first training example,
and you take derivative to sense
that your first training example.
And then you next take a look at your
second mini-batch, which is just your
second training example, and take your
gradient descent step with that, and
then you do it with the third
training example and so
on looking at just one single
training sample at the time.
So let's look at what these two extremes
will do on optimizing this cost function.
If these are the contours of the cost
function you're trying to minimize so
your minimum is there.
Then batch gradient descent
might start somewhere and
be able to take relatively low noise,
relatively large steps.
And you could just keep
matching to the minimum.
In contrast with stochastic
gradient descent
If you start somewhere let's
pick a different starting point.
Then on every iteration you're taking
gradient descent with just a single strain
example so most of the time you
hit two at the global minimum.
But sometimes you hit in the wrong
direction if that one example
happens to point you in a bad direction.
So stochastic gradient descent
can be extremely noisy.
And on average,
it'll take you in a good direction, but
sometimes it'll head in
the wrong direction as well.
As stochastic gradient
descent won't ever converge,
it'll always just kind of oscillate and
wander around the region of the minimum.
But it won't ever just head to
the minimum and stay there.
In practice, the mini-batch size you
use will be somewhere in between.
Somewhere between in 1 and m and 1 and m
are respectively too small and too large.
And here's why.
If you use batch grading descent, So
this is your mini batch size equals m.
Then you're processing a huge
training set on every iteration.
So the main disadvantage of this is
that it takes too much time too long
per iteration assuming you
have a very long training set.
If you have a small training set
then batch gradient descent is fine.
If you go to the opposite,
if you use stochastic gradient descent,
Then it's nice that you get to make
progress after processing just tone
example that's actually not a problem.
And the noisiness can be ameliorated or
can be reduced by just using
a smaller learning rate.
But a huge disadvantage to
stochastic gradient descent is
that you lose almost all your
speed up from vectorization.
Because, here you're processing
a single training example at a time.
The way you process each example
is going to be very inefficient.
So what works best in practice is
something in between where you have some,
Mini-batch size not to big or too small.
And this gives you in practice
the fastest learning.
And you notice that this has
two good things going for it.
One is that you do get
a lot of vectorization.
So in the example we used on the previous
video, if your mini batch size was
1000 examples then, you might be able
to vectorize across 1000 examples
which is going to be much faster than
processing the examples one at a time.
And second, you can also make progress,
Without needing to wait til you
process the entire training set.
So again using the numbers we have from
the previous video, each epoco each part
your training set allows you to
see 5,000 gradient descent steps.
So in practice they'll be some in-between
mini-batch size that works best.
And so with mini-batch gradient
descent we'll start here,
maybe one iteration does this,
two iterations, three, four.
And It's not guaranteed to always head
toward the minimum but it tends to head
more consistently in direction of
the minimum than the consequent descent.
And then it doesn't always exactly convert
or oscillate in a very small region.
If that's an issue you can always
reduce the learning rate slowly.
We'll talk more about
learning rate decay or
how to reduce the learning
rate in a later video.
So if the mini-batch size should
not be m and should not be 1 but
should be something in between,
how do you go about choosing it?
Well, here are some guidelines.
First, if you have a small training set,
Just use batch gradient descent.
If you have a small training set then no
point using mini-batch gradient descent
you can process a whole
training set quite fast.
So you might as well use
batch gradient descent.
What a small training set means,
I would say if it's less than maybe 2000
it'd be perfectly fine to just
use batch gradient descent.
Otherwise, if you have a bigger training
set, typical mini batch sizes would be,
Anything from 64 up to maybe
512 are quite typical.
And because of the way computer
memory is layed out and accessed,
sometimes your code runs faster if
your mini-batch size is a power of 2.
All right, so 64 is 2 to the 6th,
is 2 to the 7th, 2 to the 8,
2 to the 9, so often I'll implement my
mini-batch size to be a power of 2.
I know that in a previous video I
used a mini-batch size of 1000,
if you really wanted to do that I would
recommend you just use your 1024,
which is 2 to the power of 10.
And you do see mini batch sizes of
size 1024, it is a bit more rare.
This range of mini batch sizes,
a little bit more common.
One last tip is to make
sure that your mini batch,
All of your X,
Y that that fits in CPU/GPU memory.
And this really depends
on your application and
how large a single training sample is.
But if you ever process a mini-batch
that doesn't actually fit in CPU,
GPU memory, whether you're
using the process, the data.
Then you find that the performance
suddenly falls of a cliff and
is suddenly much worse.
So I hope this gives you a sense of
the typical range of mini batch sizes that
people use.
In practice of course the mini batch
size is another hyper parameter
that you might do a quick search
over to try to figure out which one
is most sufficient of
reducing the cost function j.
So what i would do is just
try several different values.
Try a few different powers of two and then
see if you can pick one that makes your
gradient descent optimization
algorithm as efficient as possible.
But hopefully this gives
you a set of guidelines for
how to get started with that
hyper parameter search.
You now know how to implement mini-batch
gradient descent and make your algorithm
run much faster, especially when you're
training on a large training set.
But it turns out there're even
more efficient algorithms
than gradient descent or
mini-batch gradient descent.
Let's start talking about
them in the next few videos.